---
layout: post
author: Rob Wheaton
tags: [cscc]
---

### [Emerging Technology: Semantic Search]
Semantic search][(https://www.elastic.co/what-is/semantic-search) is a technology that attempts to return search results based on the meaning of a search term. Contrast this with traditional search, which typically uses an algorithm called [BM25](https://www.elastic.co/blog/practical-bm25-part-2-the-bm25-algorithm-and-its-variables) to return search results based solely on how closely the results match the text. For example, a search for "Don Henley's Dirty Laundry" using a traditional search engine might return results for laundry machines, Henley shirts, or cleaning products. Semantic search, on the other hand, would understand that you were talking about the song. Semantic search uses Large Language Models (LLMs) to "vectorize" words and phrases into a list of numbers, similar to x and y coordinates. Instead of only two coordinates, however, the LLM gives words dozens, hundreds, and in many cases, thousands of coordinates, such that words with similar meanings end up "closer" to each other. So, in our previous example, an LLM would group "Don Henley" close to his songs and probably other members of the Eagles.

Before AI-enabled semantic searching, companies with search engines were forced to maintain huge catalogs of synonyms and special cases to try to provide relevant results for their specific use case. This ends up being a never-ending task of finding edge cases and manually adding a new rule to account for them. AI automates this mapping by understanding the meaning of a word using the huge amounts of text it was trained on. I believe the next evolution after semantic search will be the adoption of conversational search, where an LLM will return more relevant results via a back-and-forth conversation rather than requiring a user to self-select filters to narrow results. This will remove the requirement for a person to be in front of a screen to find results and open up smart speakers, kiosks, and in-person interfaces to be used to search catalogs.